bumblebees have particularly large and
heavy bodies and flight for them can be
a real effort that's particularly so in
spring when the mornings are cold and
Queen bumblebees are just emerging from
their winter sleep it's only a few
degrees about freezing but a queen needs
to get started early to look for food
the thick furry hairs on her body help
to conserve what he chooses to generate
at the moment she's only a few degrees
warmer than the surrounding vegetation
at the thermal camera clearly shows her
body is only marginally more pink and
the blue leaves and moss around her but
she has a special way of warming up for
flight she can put her wings out of gear
so that without moving them she can rev
up the wing muscles inside and that
raises the temperature within her thorax
by 20 degrees centigrade or even more as
the expanding yellow image on the
thermal camera indicates
[Music]
body temperature is now over 30 degrees
centigrade at last she has a chance of
liftoff
[Music]
she will now be able to visit the spring
flowers while it's still too cold for
others to do so
[Music]
the long trumpets of the daffodils
retain heat very well and they're still
warm even after their hot bodied
visitors have left
[Music]